---
title: Overview & Motivation
layout: page
nav_include: 2
---


# Overview

## Background

A bot is a social media account whose messages are generated in an automated fashion. Bots serve a multitude of useful and nefarious purposes. For example, news organizations and corporations can use bots to inform members of their social network latest breaking news or store promotions respectively. More sophisticated bots can be deployed to answer user support questions in the place of a human. In recent news, bots have been found to be employed as a means to disseminate fake news as a means to influence political outcomes. A Pew Research Center study found that 66% of popular websites shared in Twitter tweets are shared by bots.<sup>[1](lit_review.html)</sup>  This is significant as it illustrates the prevalence of bots in social media and how common they are used as a means of disseminating information for both positive and negative purposes.

## Goals

Twitter as a social media network has become one of the largest social media sites in the world. It is used by celebrities, organizations, governments, and ordinary people as a means to broadcast news, thoughts, and debate. This social media platform also shares its space with bots who automatically generate messages or "tweets".

Our team will collect Twitter user and tweet information directly from Twitter using the Twitter API via the Tweepy wrapper. Currently, there does not exist a way to determine whether a live account is a bot or not besides it being stated explicitly in the user's description. Furthermore, a "verified" Twitter account does not necessarily mean it is not a bot. As an alternative, we will be using the [Botometer API](https://botometer.iuni.iu.edu/) which was used by the Pew Research Center for their bot study to determine whether our collected user data was generated by a bot. We will then use this data to train classification models to answer the question - Is a particular Twitter user a bot?

Our supplementary goal is to compare whether our findings matches Pew Research Center's findings that bots are responsible for tweeting 66% of the most popular websites.

# Motivation

Social media has become a noisy medium. In its nascent stages with Friendster, MySpace, and Facebook, it was a way of keeping up to date with your friends and acquaintances. It has now evolved into a means of sharing thoughts and ideas and is often times the fastest way to get the latest breaking news.

Given the rising importance of social media as a source of information and Twitter's importance, Twitter bot-detection would provide users with another piece of information they can use in how they want to discern the information contained in a Tweet. If a user can determine that a tweet providing favorable or unsavory commentary on topics such as products, services, and political discourse is being generated from a bot, they can discount the contents of that message. Furthermore, a bot-detection option implemented at a more wide-spread level can help clear up cluttered Twitter feeds and limit it to only those tweets that they truly care about.
